 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
37 | P a g e  
 
Analysis  
What is happening in this picture?  
 
1. This picture shows expensive homes built in the chaparral of the Santa 
Monica Mountains. Based on what you have learned in this lesson , what 
environmental problem might threaten  these homes?  
2. Sometimes people have removed the chaparral vegetation to prevent  
fires from damaging their homes. Where that has occurred, the roots no 
longer hold the soil  in place. What could happen when the  winter rains 
come?  
 
Abstraction  
BIOME  
 A large, relatively distinct terrestrial region with similar climate, soil, 
plants, and animals, regardless of where it occurs in the world.  
 Encompasses many interacting ecosystems  
 considered the next level of ecological organization above community, 
ecosystem, and landscape  
 temperature and precipitation, have a predominant effec t on biome 
distribution.  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
38 | P a g e  
 
Tundra  
Arctic tundra  
 Treeless biome in the far north that consists of boggy plains covered by 
lichens and mosses; it has harsh, cold winters and extremely short 
summers.  
 alpine tundra - similar ecosystem located in the higher elevations of 
mountains, above the tree line  
 growing season is short, the days are long  
 little precipitation, and most of the yearly 10 to 25 cm (4 to 10 in) of rain 
or snow falls during summer months  
 Tundra soil is nutrient poor and have little detritus 
 Permafrost  beneath surface soil and impedes drainage  
 Limited precipitation, combined with low temperatures, flat topography 
(or surface features), and the layer of permafrost, produces a 
landscape of broad, shallow lakes and ponds, sluggish streams, and 
bog 
 recovers slowly from even small disturbances  
 Oil and natural gas exploration and military use have caused damage 
to tundra likely to persist for hundreds of years  
Flora  
 
Fauna  
Lemming    ptarmigan   

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
39 | P a g e  
 
 supports relatively few species compared to other biomes but the 
species exist in great numbers  
 Dominant plants: Mosses, lichens, grasses, and grasslike sedges  
 Tundra plants seldom grow taller than 30 cm (12 in)  
 (year -round): lemmings, voles, weasels, arctic foxes, snowshoe hares, 
ptarmigan, snowy o wls, and musk oxen  
Boreal Forest  
 region of coniferous forest (such as pine, spruce, and fir) in the 
Northern Hemisphere; located just south of the tundra. Also called 
taiga . 
 Winters in the boreal forest are extremely cold and severe, although 
not as harsh as those in the tundra.  
 receives little precipitation (50 cm (20 in) per year  
 soil is typically acidic and mineral poor, with a thick surface layer of 
partly decomposed pine and spruce needles.  
 permafrost deep under the surface  
 has numerous ponds and lake s dug by ice sheets during the last ice 
age. 
 world’s top source of industrial wood and wood fiber  
Flora  
 
 Dominating: Black and white spruces, balsam fir, eastern larch, and 
other conifers (cone -bearing evergreens)  
 Conifers have many drought -resistant adaptations, such as needle -like 
leaves whose minimal surface area prevents water loss by evaporation  
 
 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
40 | P a g e  
 
Fauna  
 
caribou  
 Consists of some larger species such as caribou, which migrate from 
the tundra for winter; wolves; brown and black bears; and moose.  
 most boreal mammals are medium sized to small, including rodents, 
rabbits, and smaller predators such as lynx, sable, and mink.  
 Birds are abundant in the summer but migrate to warmer climates for 
winter.  
 Insects are plentiful, but few amphibians and eptiles occur except in the 
southern boreal forest.  
 
Temperate Rain Forest  
 A coniferous biome with cool weather, dense fog, an d high 
precipitation.  
 Occurs on the northwest coast of North America, southeastern 
Australia and in southern South America  
 Annual precipitation is high —more than 127 cm (50 in) —and is 
augmented by condensation of water from dense coastal fogs  
 seasonal fl u ctuation is narrow; winters are mild, and summers are 
cool.  
 Relatively nutrient -poor soil, though its organic content may be high.  
 Cool temperatures slow the activity of bacterial and fungal 
decomposers.  
 rich wood producer, supplying lumber and pulpwood  
Flora  
 Dominant: large evergreen trees such as western hemlock, Douglas fir, 
western red cedar, Sitka spruce, and western arborvitae  
 rich in epiphytes mainly mosses, club mosses, lichens, and ferns, all of 
which also carpet the ground  

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
41 | P a g e  
 
 
western hemlock  
Faun a 
 
Wood rat  
 Squirrels, wood rats, mule deer, elk, numerous bird species, and 
several species of amphibians and reptiles  
 
Temperate Deciduous Forest  
 A forest biome that occurs in temperate areas where annual 
precipitation ranges from about 75 cm to 126 cm (30 to 50 in).  
 Hot summers and cold winters  
 Soil consists of a topsoil rich in organic material and a deep, clay -rich 
lower layer.  
 among the first biomes converted to agricultural use  
Flora  
 Dominating in northeastern and mideastern  United States:  Broad -
leaved hardwood trees (oak, hickory, and beech)  
 Trees form a dense canopy that overlies saplings and shrubs  

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
42 | P a g e  
 
  
Oak 
Fauna  
 originally contained a variety of large mammals, such as puma, wolves, 
and bison, which are now absent.  
 deer, be ars, and many small mammals and birds  
 
Bison  
Tropical Rain forest  
 A lush, species -rich forest biome that occurs where the climate is warm 
and moist throughout the year.  
 are found in Central and South America, Africa, and Southeast Asia  
 Annual precipitatio n is typically between 200 and 450 cm (80 to 180 in).  
 commonly occurs in areas with ancient, highly weathered, mineral -poor 
soil. 
  Little organic matter accumulates in such soils; because temperatures 
are high year -round, bacteria, fungi, and detritus -feeding ants and 
termites decompose organic litter quite rapidly.  
 Roots quickly absorb nutrient minerals from the decomposing materia l. 

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
43 | P a g e  
 
 A fully developed tropical rain forest has at least three distinct stories, 
or layers, of vegetation (emergent story, canopy, understory)  
Flora  
 
Bromeliad  
 No single species dominates  
 trees are typically evergreen flowering plants.  
 Emergent layer: very tall trees, some 50 m (164 ft)  
 middle story, or canopy: trees 30 to 40 m (100 to 130 ft)  
 smaller plants in the sparse understory  
 communities of epiphytic plants such as ferns, mosses, orchids, and 
bromeliads  
Fauna  
 
Sloth  
 about 90% of tropical rainforest organisms are adapted to live in the 
canopy  
 abundant and varied insects, reptiles, and amphibians  
 Mammals: sloths and monkeys  
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
44 | P a g e  
 
Chaparral  
 A biome with mild, moist winters and hot, dry summers; vegetation is 
typically small -leaved evergreen shrub s and small trees.  
 soil is thin and often not very fertile.  
 Wildfires occur naturally and are particularly frequent in late summer 
and autumn  
Flora  
 
Scrub Oak  
 Dominant: dense thicket of evergreen shrubs — often short, drought -
resistant pine or scrub oak trees that grow 1 to 3 m (3 to 10 ft) tall  
 
Fauna  
 
 Mule deer, wood rats, chipmunks, lizards, and many species of birds  

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
45 | P a g e  
 
Temperate Grassland  
 A grassland with hot summers, cold winters, and less rainfall than is 
found in the temperate deciduous forest biome.  
 Average annual precipitation ranges from 25 -75 cm (10 to 30 in)  
 Grassland soil has considerable organic material  
 occur in the United States in parts of Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, 
Nebraska, Kansas, and other Midwestern states  
 Trees grow spars ely except near rivers and streams, but grasses taller 
than a person grow in great profusion in the deep, rich soil.  
 Periodic wildfires help to maintain grasses as the dominant vegetation 
in grasslands.  
 formerly supported large herds of grazing animals (b ison and 
pronghorn elk)  
 Principal predators: wolves, coyotes  
 Smaller animals included prairie dogs and their predators (foxes, black -
footed ferrets, and various birds of prey), grouse, reptiles such as 
snakes and lizards, and great numbers of insects.  
 are temperate grasslands that receive less precipitation than moist 
temperate grasslands but more precipitation than deserts.  
 occur in parts of Montana, Wyoming, South Dakota, and other 
midwestern states  
 Grasses that grow knee high or lower dominate  
 Plants grow less abundantly than in the moister grasslands, and bare 
soil is occasionally exposed.  
Fauna  
 
Pronghorn Elk  

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
46 | P a g e  
 
Savanna  
 A tropical grassland with widely scattered trees or clumps of trees.  
 found in ar eas of low rainfall or, more commonly, in areas of intense 
seasonal rainfall with prolonged dry periods.  
 Temperatures vary little throughout the year.  
 Precipitation is the overriding climate factor: Annual precipitation is 85 
to 150 cm (34 to 60 in).  
 soil is somewhat low in essential nutrient minerals, in part because it is 
heavily leached during  
 rainy periods —that is, nutrient minerals filter out of the topsoil.  
 Occur in Africa, also in  in South America, western India, and northern 
Australia.  
 converte d into rangeland for cattle and other domesticated animals  
Flora  
 
Acacia  
 has wide expanses of grasses interrupted by occasional trees like the 
acacia, which bristles with thorns to provide protection against 
herbivores.  
 Both trees and grasses have fi re -adapted features, such as extensive 
underground root systems, that enable them to survive seasonal 
droughts as well as periodic fi res.  
Fauna  
 herbivores such as antelope, giraffe, elephants, wildebeest, and zebra  
 Large predators, such as lions and hyenas, kill and scavenge the 
herds.  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
47 | P a g e  
 
 
Wildebeest  
Desert  
 A biome in which the lack of precipitation limits plant growth; deserts 
are found in both temperate and tropical regions.  
 consists of dry areas found in both temp erate (cold deserts) and 
subtropical or tropical regions (warm deserts).  
 Low water vapor content of the desert atmosphere → daily temperature 
extremes of heat and cold  
 Desert environments vary greatly depending on the amount of 
precipitation they receive, which is generally less than 25 cm (10 in) 
per year.  
 desert soil is low in organic material but is often high in mineral content, 
particularly salts  
Flora  
 
Sagebrush  
 Plants in North American deserts include cacti, yuccas, Joshua trees, 
and sagebrush  
 Desert plants are adapted to conserve water and as a result tend to 
have few, small, or no leaves.  

---PAGE BREAK---
 People and the Earth’s Ecosystems  
 
48 | P a g e  
 
 Cactus leaves are modified into spines  
 Other desert plants shed their l eaves for most of the year, growing only 
during the brief moist season.  
Fauna  
 
 typically small  
 desert -adapted insects and arachnids (such as tarantulas and 
scorpions)few desert -adapted amphibians (frogs and toads) and many 
reptiles, such as the desert tor toise, Gila monster, and Mojave 
rattlesnake.  
 Desert mammals in North America include rodents such as kangaroo 
rats, as well as mule deer and jackrabbits.  
 Birds of prey, especially owls, live on the rodents and jackrabbits, and 
even the scorpions.  
 During the driest months of the year, many desert an imals tunnel 
underground, where they remain inactive.  
 
AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS  
 
 The most fundamental division in aquatic ecology is probably between 
freshwater and saltwater environments.  
 Factors affecting distribution of organisms  
 Salinity - the concentration o f dissolved salts (such as sodium 
chloride) in a body of water  
 dissolved oxygen  
 nutrient minerals  
 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
